## Birthday Problem

#### Statement
We have $k$ people, and we want to find the probability that 2 of them have the same birthday.
Excluding Feb 29th, assume the other 365 days of the year are equally likely, and assume independence of births. [no twins, etc.]

**Extreme Case**: If $k > 365$, the probability is $1$. [The pigeonhole principle]

#### Solution
Calculate the complement of the event.
$P(no \space match) = \frac{365 \times 364 \times 363 \times ... \times (365-k+1)}{365^k}$
(There should be k terms on the nominator)

$P(no \space match) = 1$ if $k=1$, as there are no _two_ people in the room to be a match.

$P(match) = 1 - P(no \space match)$

**Note**: The important quantity here is not $k$, but $k \choose 2$, since we have that many **pairs** of people.

Calculating the probabilities, we get:

| $k$ | $p(match)$ |
|---|---|
| 1  | 0.0%  |
| 5 | 2.7% |
| 10 | 11.7% |
| 20 | 41.1% |
| 40 | 89.1% |
| 50 | 97.0% |
| 75 | 99.97% |
| 100 | 99.999 97% |

<hr/>

## Properties of Probabilities
(derived from the the axioms of probability, defined in the previous lecture)

1. $P(A^c) = 1 - P(A)$
   * Proof: $P(S) = P(A \cup A^c) = P(A) + P(A^c) = 1$ 
   Note that we can write this because $A$ and $A^c$ are disjoint.

2. If $A \subseteq B$, then $P(A) \leq P(B)$
    * $A \subseteq B$ means that if $A$ occurs, then $B$ must occur.
    * Proof: $B = A \cup (B \cap A^c) \Rightarrow P(B) = P(A) + P(B \cap A^c)$
    * Again note that this is ok because $A$ and $A^c$ are disjoint.

3. $P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B)$
    * The $P(A \cap B)$ was double counted.

4. **General Inclusion-Exclusion:**
    $P(\cup_{a=1}^{n} A_a) = \Sigma_{i=1}^n P(A_i) - \Sigma_{i<j} P(A_i \cap A_j) + \Sigma_{i<j<k} P(A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k) - ... + (-1)^{n+1} P(\cup_{b=1}^{n} A_b)$

<hr/>


## de Montmorte's Theorem (Matching problem)

#### Statement
We have a deck of $n$ shuffled cards labeled 1 to $n$, find the probability of the $n$-th card's place in the deck matching its label.
[**At least** $1$ card like this]

#### Solution
Inclusion-Exclusion is the easiest way to solve this problem.

Let $A_j$ be the event that the $j$-th card matches its label, we want to know $P(A_1 \cup A_2 \cup ... \cup A_n)$

$P(A_j) = \frac{1}{n}$ , since all positions are equally likely for the card labeled $j$.
(This doesn't depend on $j$, and that's what makes the computation simple.)

$P(A_1 \cap A_2) = \frac{1 \times 1 \times (n-2)!}{n!} = \frac{1}{n(n-1)}$
(1 is first, 2 is second, the rest could b anywhere.)

$P(A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ... \cap A_k) = \frac{(n-k)!}{n!}$

Which results in:

$P(\cup_{i=1}^{n} A_i) = n \times \frac{1}{n} - {n \choose 2} \frac{1}{n(n-1)} + {n \choose 3} \frac{1}{n(n-1)(n-2)} - ... \newline = 1 - \frac{n(n-1)}{2!} \times \frac{1}{n(n-1)} + \frac{n(n-1)(n-2)}{3!} \times {1}{n(n-1)(n-2)} - ...  \newline = 1 - \frac{1}{2!} + \frac{1}{3!} - \frac{1}{4!} + ... + (-1)^n \frac{1}{n!} \approx 1 - \frac{1}{e}$

The last equivalency is resulted from the Taylor series for $e^x$ around $0$.

#### Reminder: Taylor's series
$\Sigma_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{ f^{(n)}(a) }{n!} (x-a)^n = f(x)$

For $e^x$ at $0$, we get: $\Sigma_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{ 1 }{n!} (x-0)^n = e^x$
Therefore, $e^{-1} \approx \Sigma_{n=0}^{\infty} = 1 - 1 + \frac{1}{2!} - \frac{1}{3!} + ... $

We also have:

$P(A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ... \cap A_k) = \frac{(n-k)!}{n!}$
Which is by symmetry true for any subset of size $k$, and there are $n \choose k$ subsets of of size $k$.

Therefore,
$P(no \space match) = P(\cap_{j=1}^{n} A_j^c) = \frac{1}{e} = 1 - P(a \space match)$