## Independence

#### Definition

- Events $A$ and $B$ are independent if $P(A \cap B) = P(A) \times P(B)$

**Note**: This is completely different from disjointness.

**Disjointness**: $A$ and $B$ ar disjoint if $P(A \cap B) = 0$, meaning that if $A$ occured, $B$ can't occur and vice versa.

- Events $A, B, C, ...$ are independent if:
    * All events are pairwise independent, **and**
    * $P(A, B, C, ...) = P(A) \times P(B) \times P(C) \times ...$

**Note**: With regards to the two conditions above, one of them does not imply the other

<hr/>

### Newton-Pepys Problem

_Statement_:
When rolling fair dice, which is the most likely?

A. At least one $6$ with $6$ dice.
B. At least two $6$'s with $12$ dice.
C. At least three $6$'s with $18$ dice.

_Solution_:
$$P(A) = 1 - P(no \space 6) = 1 - (\frac{5}{6})^6 \approx 0.665 \newline
P(B) = 1 - P(no \space 6) - P(one \space 6) = 1 - (\frac{5}{6})^12 - 12 \times (\frac{1}{6}) (\frac{5}{6})^11 \approx 0.619  \newline
P(C) = 1 - \sum_{k=0}^2 {18 \choose k} (\frac{1}{6})^k (\frac{5}{6})^{18-k} \approx 0.597 $$

<hr/>

### Conditional Probability
How should you update probabilities (uncertainty) based on new evidence?

#### Definition
$$P(A|B) = \frac{P(A \cap B)}{P(B)}$$

#### Intuition
Conditioning on $B$, we assume that $B$ has occured, so we have to look at the subspace in which $B$ has happened. If any other event like $C$ occurs as well, we will have to take the intersection of the subspaces in which and $B$ and $C$ respectively happen.

#### A Couple of Theorems

- $ P(A \cap B) = P(B) \times P(A|B) = P(B \cap A) = P(A) \times P(B | A) $
- $ P(A_1, A_2, ... , A_n) = P(A_1) \times P(A_2 | A_1) \times P(A_3 | A_1, A_2) ... P(A_n | A_1 , ... , A_{n-1}) $
- $P(A|B) = \frac{P(B|A) P(A)}{P(B)}$ which is known as the **Bayes' Rule**.
