## Monty Hall problem

There are $3$ doors, $1$ door with a car prize and $2$ doors each with a goat prize. We want to find the car.
We first pick a door, then the host, Monty, opens one of the $2$ other doors to show a goat behind it. 
Now you have a chance to choose between the door you picked initially and the door that Monty didn't open.
Assume $P(car) = \frac{1}{3}$ for all doors and assume that if both of Monty's doors are goat doors, he choses which one to open with equal probability.
_Is it better for you to switch?_ **Yes!**

**Solution**:
The problem is the same no matter which door we choose at first, so let's just assume that we choose door $1$.
_Note_: Our evidence here should be that one of the other doors has a goat **and** the fact that Monty opens that door.

**Probability Diagram**:

(Put it here later bcz internet down lulz)

After renormalizing, we have:
$$
P(\text{Success on switch | Monty opens door } 2) = \frac{2}{3} \\
P(\text{Success on switch | Monty opens door } 2) = \frac{2}{3}
$$

_Intuitively_, your initial guess is wrong $\frac{2}{3}$ of the time, so it's better for you to switch.

_Mathematically_, using **LOTP** and conditioning on the things we wish we knew (Wishful thinking!):
Event $S$: Success assuming **Switch**,
Event $D_j$: Door $j$ has the car.

Again assume we have chosen door $1$,

$$
\begin{align*}
P(S) &= P(S|D_1)P(D_1) + P(S|D_2)P(D_2) + P(S|D_3)P(D_3) \\
&= 0 + 1 \times \frac{1}{3} + 1 \times \frac{1}{3} \\
&= \frac{2}{3}
\end{align*}
$$


## Simpsons' Paradox
Assume we have two doctors with the following records:

**Dr. Hibbert**:
| --- | Heart Surgery | Putting on Band-Aid |
| --- |---| --- |
| **Success** | 70 | 10 |
| **Failure** | 20 | 0 |

<br/>

**Dr. Nick**:
| --- | Heart Surgery | Putting on Band-Aid |
| --- |---| --- |
| **Success** | 2 | 81 |
| **Failure** | 8 | 9 |
 
 <br/>

On each given producedure, the success rate of Dr. Hibbert ($80\%$) is higher, but unconditionally, the success rate of Dr. Nick ($83\%$) is higher.

_How did this happen?_
Because:
$$
\frac{70}{70+20} + \frac{10}{10+0} \neq \frac{70+10}{70+10+20}
$$
That's not how sums work!

**Mathematically**, assumme you've had a medical procedure; our _events_ are:
$A$: Successful procedure
$B$: You went to Dr. Nick
$C$: You had heart surgery

Then, given the data:
1. $$ P(A|B, C) < P(A|B^c, C) $$
2. $$ P(A|B, C) < P(A|B^c, C^c) $$

**But**,
3. $$ P(A|B) > P(A|B^c) $$

You can't get from **1** and **2** to **3**, or even **3**'s complement, since:

$$
P(A|B) = P(A|B,C)P(C|B) + P(A|B,C^c)P(C^c|B)
$$

While it's true that:
$$
P(A|B,C) < P(A|B^c, C) \\
P(A|B, C^c) < P(A|B^c, C^c)
$$

The $P(C|B)$ and $P(C^c|B)$ are the things that change the balance.

Here $C$ is called **confounder/control**, because it's something we want to control for.

**Note**: When you're getting the intersection with the evidence ($A$ given $B$ and $C$), you should set the priors in your LOTP as $P(C|B)$ since we know $C$ already happened. [Same as: $P((A|B)|C))$]