# Expectation and Indicator Random Variables

### Expected value of a discrete random variable
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = \sum_{x} \, x \times  P(X=x)
$$
Basically, the sum of all values times the value of the PMF at that value.

 - Consider $X \sim Bern(p)$:
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = 1 \times P(X=1) + 0 \times P(X=0) = p
$$

### Linearity of Expectation
$$
\mathbb{E}(X+Y) = \mathbb{X} + \mathbb{Y} \\
\mathbb{E}(cX) = c \times \mathbb{E}(X) \\
$$
for all $c \in \mathbb{R}$.

### Indicator Random Variables
Assume we want to analyze the probability with regards to event $A$ like this:
$$
X = \begin{cases}
  1 & \text{if $A$ occurs} \\
  0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
Then $X$ is an **indicator random variable** and:
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = P(A)
$$

This is called the **fundamental bridge** between _expected values_ and _probabilities_.


- Consider $X \sim Bin(n, p)$, we want to compute its expected value:
    * Solution 1:
$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{E}(X) &= \sum_{k=0}^n {n \choose k} p^k (1-p)^{n-k} \\
&\stackrel{*}{=} \sum_{k=0}^n  n \times {n-1 \choose k-1} p^k (1-p)^{n-k} \\
&= np \sum_{k=1}^n {n-1 \choose k-1} p^{k-1}(1-p)^{n-k} \\
&\stackrel{binomial}{=} np \sum_{j=0}^{n-1} {n-1 \choose j} p^{j}(1-p)^{n-j} \\
&= np
\end{align*} 
$$
Where the proof of the equality marked by (*) is the story of choosing $k$ people out of $n$ people with $1$ of them as president.
    
    
    * Solution 2:
    $$
    X = \sum_{i=1}^n X_i, \quad \text{where } X_i \sim Bern(p) \\
    \Rightarrow \mathbb{E}(X) = \mathbb{E}(\sum_{i=1}^n X_i) = \sum_{i=1}^n \mathbb{E}(X_i) = np
    $$
    Where the last equality is obtained by the linearity of expected values.


_Reminder_:
_Hypergeometric Distribution_: Probability of $w$ successes in $n$ draws, _without replacement_, from a finite population of $N$ elements that contains exactly $k$ desired elements.

PMF: 
$$
P(X=w) = \frac{{w \choose k}{N-n \choose N-w}}{N \choose n}
$$

<br/>

- Consider a randomly drawn $5$-card hand, $X = \#aces$. Let $X_j$ be the indicator of the $j$-th card being an ace; where $1 \leq j \leq 5$.
$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{E}(X) &= \mathbb{E}(X_1 + ... + X_5) \\
&= \mathbb{E}(X_1) + ... + \mathbb{E}(X_5) \\ 
&\stackrel{Symmetry}{=} 5 \times \mathbb{E}(X_1) \\
&\stackrel{Bridge}{=} P(\text{1st card being ace}) \\
&= 5 \times \frac{4}{52} = \frac{5}{13} \\
\end{align*}
$$
_Intuition_:
Assume we label the cards $1, ..., 5$ left to right. Also, we reveal all the cards at once. This way the symmetry becomes more apparent.
$$
$$
_Note_ that this method gives the expected value of the _any_ hypergeometric.

### Expectation value of $X \sim Geom(p)$:
_Math Proof_:
Set $q = 1-p$, then
$$
\mathbb{E}(X) = \sum_{k=0}^{\infty} kpq^k = p \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} kq^k = \, ?
$$
We start playing around with the the terms:
$$
\sum_{k=0}^{\infty} q^k = \frac{1}{1-q} \\
\stackrel{d/dq}{\rightarrow} \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} kq^{k-1} = \frac{1}{(1-q)^2} \\
\Rightarrow \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} kq^{k} = \frac{q}{(1-q)^2} \\
\begin{align*}
\Rightarrow \mathbb{E}(X) &= p \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} kq^k \\
&= \frac{pq}{(1-q)^2} \\
&= \frac{pq}{p^2} \\
&= \frac{q}{p}
\end{align*}
$$

_Story Proof_:
Let $c = \mathbb{E}(X)$, then

$$
c = 0  \times p + (1+c) \times q = q + cq
$$
($0 \times p$): First trial succeds
($(1+c) \times q$): First trial fails, we have one fail and problem repeats itself/
Solving for $c$,
$$
\begin{align*}
c - cq &= c(1-q) \\
&= cp \\ 
&= q \\
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\Rightarrow c = \frac{q}{p}
$$